This week on the podcast, what a
fascinating conversation. Bob Moser is
founder and CEO of Prime Group Holdings.
Uh they're the largest privately held
self-s storage owner, operator, investor
in the country. Fascinating
conversation. Started acquiring
properties in in college. Eventually uh
started doing RVs and uh mobile homes.
just really fascinating uh methodology
of identifying undervalued properties.
Uh I thought the conversation was
fascinating and I think you will also.
With no further ado, Bob Moser of Prime
Group Holdings.
Bob Moser, welcome to Bloomberg.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> So, let's start out with your your
background. Bachelor's with honors in
economics from Union College.
>> Yes, sir.
>> What What was the original career plan?
>> Tell you the truth, it was always real
estate. So, I've always had an affinity
for real estate. Really? Yeah. My mom
tells the story that when I was like 14
or 15, she'd drop me off at the local
real estate broker's office and I would
drive them nuts for a couple hours. And
it was either that or just to get rid of
me out of her hair probably. But I
always had it. Got my real estate
license before college. I got my
brokerage license while at college and
actually started the business basically
my sophomore junior year while at Union.
>> Wow, that's amazing. So, so your college
thesis focused on how to value
incomeroucing real estate investments by
comparing demand and value like so you
really knew exactly what you wanted to
do by your senior year. What was the uh
what was the outcome of that college
thesis?
>> It's a good question. So it was on the
valuation of incomeroucing properties
using hydonic and non-hydonic regression
analysis. So basically
>> when we say hyonic you're adjusting for
quality, location, attributes of the
property uh taking away basically the
revenue stream. What else adds value to
the asset
>> and I was really hyperfocused on
fragmented real estate assets. So
basically every real estate asset when
you look at it goes through the same
lifestyle uh life cycle when they're
originally owned, developed, managed by
local regional developers. Then over
time the larger groups come in and
consolidate. So I was looking for that
reflection point when that consolidation
starts. And I was focused back then in
college on the thesis for manufactured
housing communities. And when you're a
college student, you know, people pick
up the phone when you call because
they're always trying to help somebody
out. And I was very fortunate to speak
to Sam Zel uh and some other obviously
leaders in the real estate business. And
they gave me some great insight. And one
of the ones he said to me was that
there's a lot of buyers, but there's not
much product out there. You have to go
out and find product for people. If
you're going to be a good real estate
investor, you have to have the ability
to find the assets. So, I decided to
start a company in college to facilitate
that transaction. Obviously, I didn't
have any money. My dad was a retired New
York City detective. Uh my mom was a
teachers aid, so I didn't grow up with
any wealth. But I figured out that if I
could find good product, there was a
numerous amount of buyers to buy it. And
I did this by using the Freedom
Information Act of New York and then
various other states where I figured out
that I could track all real estate item
real estate asset classes using the the
same common denominator of water and
sewer permitting. So I went down to
Albany and I made my request and union
was trimester. So, I had these big gaps
off around Thanksgiving to New Year's.
And one day, you know, UPS knocked at my
door and I had converted my parents
upstairs bedroom to my corporate office
like any kind of broke entrepreneur
would do. And he's like, and handed me a
box. I'm like, "Oh, there's my real
estate information." And he's like,
"Actually, that truck out there is." I
had boxes and boxes of the old DOSs
printouts of every self storage
facility, every mobile home park, every
RV park, marina, multifamily.
>> So, wait, let me let me interrupt you
for a quick second.
>> Sure.
>> Just so some of the younger listeners
can appreciate this. Forget AI. This is
really before there was any sort of
usable internet where you could say,
"Hey, let me scan um NY.gov gov and find
all the re real estate permitting. This
is physical paper stored in physical um
office buildings and file cabinets.
>> I had to pay per page on the printout.
>> And and what did that cost and how how
long ago was this?
>> So this was back in 979 9697.
Uh it probably cost me a couple hundred
dollars which I really didn't have as a
college student. But I realized quickly
that that information was the key to
finding assets. And what I would do is I
would systematically go through these
lists basically county by county, asset
type by asset type, identifying the
institutional quality assets that were
still owned by mom and pops or
non-institutional investors. And then I
would do a deep dive on those assets. I
would call and get the rent. I would
call the tax assessor to get the real
estate taxes. My goal was to know more
about the real estate than the owner did
by the time I called them on the phone
to see if they'd be interested in
selling. And then I would continually
call them every 30 to 45 days after that
until they became a seller.
>> Huh. That's unbelievable. So that's what
led you to unconventional and overlooked
segments. You mentioned marinas and RV
parks and um other things like that. U
manufactured homes. How long did it take
you before you managed to acquire your
first property?
>> So there was a I I acquired my first
property shortly after college. And what
happened was there was a big RV, I'm
sorry, mobile home park in Streetsboro,
Ohio. Uh it was actually called Camelot
Village. Again, a guy named Mike Duffy
owned it. And I used to call Mr. Duffy
probably every 30 days to see if he
would sell his asset. And one day I
finally got him to sell. And I made a
nice fee on the transaction, but I still
needed a little bit more. And the year I
graduated, my mom took a home equity
loan against the family house.
>> Is that how you financed? That's how I
financed my first acquisition. So before
that, I was facilitating transactions,
making fees, almost like a broker, but
not a listing broker.
>> And then the first asset I bought was
when my my parents took a home equity
loan.
>> So if in you mentioned you got your real
estate license in college, how are you
finding buyers for these
>> sort of unconventional properties? Are
you going to the big institutions and
saying, "Hey, I have a property that
fits into your portfolio." Now, what I
actually did was I had these lists
obviously that I got from the foil
request and I kept on seeing the same
name show up in certain buyers or
sellers that were owners. Okay.
>> So, if I knew they owned five assets in
that particular region, I thought, hey,
if I develop one or I get a relationship
with a seller that would sell, I would
bring it to that.
>> You knew where to bring it
>> 100%.
>> Huh. Really, really quite fascinating.
And so, when did you found your own real
estate brokerage firm?
>> So, that was basically in college. So,
that was in college.
>> That was in college. I became a real
estate broker before college. I was a
licensed salesperson and then you have
to have x amount of hours under your
belt before you can become a brokerage
and I got my brokerage license in 97.
>> So how long did you do that as a um as a
broker rather than an investor or they
kind of ran parallel paths?
>> No, so I was basically working
exclusively for generating fees from
like 97 to 2000ish 2001. I started
buying my first asset around 299 going
into 2000. Obviously, the first one I
bought. Uh, it took me a while obviously
to give up the transactional side until
I could support myself on owning assets.
>> So, you ramp up various assets until
2013 when you start prime group. Was
that the path?
>> So, what I did was I so my mom took the
home equity loan, my parents did against
their home. Uh the first asset I bought
actually I had sold to that gentleman 10
months prior and I called him up and I
said, "Hey, uh you know, Wayne, I sold
you this property. It was on Cape Cod.
Uh would you be interested in selling
it?" And he I sold it to him for 3
million. He ended up selling it to me
for 5 million. Wow.
>> Uh 10 months earlier. And then I moved
up to Cape Cod and I actually ran the
asset for the first two years to see how
the business worked
>> because I didn't want to be that owner
that would tell people what to do
without actually being able to do it
themselves. And then I bought my second
property and then I bought my third. And
then by 2005, August 12th, 2005, I had a
large um uh liquidity event. I sold a
group of assets to Samzel. Uh that's
when he converted MHC, which was
manufactured housing communities, his
REIT to equity lifestyle communities,
and he started to focus on RV parks. So
on that date, I sold him roughly five
assets back then, which provided a
substantial amount of liquidity to
myself and I went out and did a bunch of
that's when I really started to build
the portfolio.
>> So So I want to draw a line. So you're a
college kid randomly calling big real
estate investors
>> including Samzel who took your phone
call.
>> Took my phone call
>> and you had a long conversation with
him.
>> I did. I did.
>> And so how many years later is like,
"Hey Sam, do you It's me, Bob. Do you
remember me? I have some assets for you.
It
>> It was funny when you say that because
when I was dealing with the CEO, there
was a CEO at the time. Uh I always
wonder because I never really spoke to
him then after. So I wonder if he
actually put two and two together. I'm
sure he did.
>> But it was it was a really interesting
transaction. Uh you know, it was the RV
world was an interesting business. The
RV parks. It was basically I was the
first one to really you securitize
financing in the RV park world. It
hadn't been really done prior. Uh so it
was a it was an interesting time.
>> So now you have a liquidity event.
You're tapping into Wall Street
securization or to fund this. How uh at
what point do you say oh there's a ready
source of capital? I could just put a
rollup strategy together and run all
these properties more efficiently than
mom and pops can do. uh every one of
these would have to have a separate
accounting and a separate tax filing and
all that stuff. You centralize that and
suddenly it's productive and efficient
100%. The what I so basically from let's
say 2000 through 2005 2006 I was
acquiring a lot of mobile home RV parks.
I also owned uh shopping centers a
little bit of everything. It was a
pretty diversified portfolio. And what
really transitioned to me to become an
asset specialist, which we are now, was
how well self- storage was doing during
the first financial crisis. I was doing
a year-end portfolio review around
2007208,
and the self- storage assets were a
smaller part of my portfolio back then,
but they were outperforming everything
else at that time. And it wasn't like
they were going, you know, straight up,
but they were so defensive and they were
doing so well when all these other
assets were getting beat up. And I
decided at that point to become an asset
specialist singularly focus on self-
storage. So I sold off over the next few
years I sold off the rest of the mobile
home and RV parks. I had multifamily
that went to thirdparty management and
from that time forward I continued just
to consolidate self storage. This was on
my own balance sheet at this time and
then I started the co-mingled fund
business around 2014. So from basically
2007208 through 2014 I was using my own
capital or in-house capital to acquire
these assets.
>> So I'm curious why would self storage do
well during the financial crisis? Was it
literally people were losing their
homes? They had to figure out where all
their stuff had to go or what was
happening in that period that made that
such a a standout performer.
>> I would say it was more the defensive
nature of it where these other assets
were decreasing dramatically. storage
was holding its own and it's need-based
real estate. I do not buy aspirational
real estate. I think that's where a lot
of people get in trouble. I buy real
estate that people need for all
different economic cycles. And that's
what self- storage is. You know, it's
upgrades, downgrades, death, divorce,
all of those types of life cycles or
some that happens in life creates a need
for storage. It seems we're going to
talk more about self storage in a
moment, but it it seems like you are in
a variety of different regions
everywhere from Saratoga to Springs to
Chelsea here in New York City. Um, how
do your underwriting assumptions differ
relative to is this urban, is this
suburban, is it exurban, is it out in
the sticks? H how do you look at these
different spaces? Obviously valuations
differ and rents differ. What what's the
thought process?
>> So we truly obviously real estate that
sound cliche but it's location location
location. So if you look at our
portfolio it basically you take the
United States and it looks like a U. So
we're up and down the coasts. We're
right now we don't have exposure in
Texas. Uh and the reason why is that
obvious there's a lot of open zoning in
Texas and one of our major requirements
is barriers to entry. Mhm.
>> And the reason why we're along
coastlines and then we're up picking up
in the mountain cities out in like Utah
and Colorado is that there's a barrier
that's natural barrier keeping the
population tight to a nucleus. So we
want to be in predictable downtown
retail corridors when we're choosing the
asset. So that's the first glance over
deciding where we're going to buy. Then
it goes down to what is the supply?
What's going to constrain the supply in
that particular market? Because like any
other type of real estate, there's
always areas that are overs supplied.
And the key is finding these areas that
are under supplied. When I was first
doing this with paper, it was a lot of
obviously, you know, calling on the
phone, calling the assessor, feeling the
market out, visiting. Now, we have built
very sophisticated software that helps
us pre-identify these areas that we
should be buying, not even the area, the
exact asset we should be buying even
though it's not for sale. So, we built
out this program where it pre basically
I can put in our buy box and it
populates out of the 60,000 self-s
storage facilities in the country the
ones we should go after even though
they're not for sale. And then what we
have is our deal teams which are group
of roughly three dozen people internally
that we allocate the deals that fit our
criteria to and then they continue to
call and visit those owners until we
convert them to sellers. So, we truly
buy everything off market and it's 100%
organically originated. So, so let's
talk a little bit about the business
model of self- storage. I see these
areas popping up everywhere. I see these
self- storage um facilities popping up
everywhere.
How widely used are they? How profitable
are they versus, you know, traditional
commercial real estate? What what is the
appeal that just over the past 10 20
years this space has exploded?
>> It's a great question. So self- storage
has the lowest break even occupancy of
any institutional real estate asset
class I can think of. So at 40%
occupied, you're breaking even on
expenses. So there it's very risk
adverse. It's a very riskadverse asset
from top to bottom. When you're looking
at how the what the tenant signs to
become a tenant, these are
month-to-month leases. So we can adjust
to what's happening in the macro
environment at any given time. There's
no lease risk whatsoever in the asset
class. So, no lobby, no dorm in, no
showers, no none of the things that
multif family, correct, makes so
expensive.
>> Well, you think about a multif family,
if you're going to turn a unit, it's
going to cost you anywhere from, let's
say, 1,500 to 5,000 depending on what
you're doing. Self storage is $5. We're
sweeping it and replacing a light bulb
if there is one. So, and tenant
improvement is what really hurts
especially office, but a lot of real
estate assets. You're constantly chasing
that capital improvement.
>> H really, really quite interesting. What
about ancillary revenue streams? We've
all seen those silly reality shows where
they find these, you know, someone
abandons a unit and they find some
million-doll painting in there. H how
much nonsense is
>> Yeah, I haven't had that luck. But the
uh It's funny that you bring that up.
So, prior to those TV shows, we would
have the auctions on site
>> kind of like you see in those the TV
shows.
>> What happened though, everybody all a
sudden started showing up to these had a
personality. They thought they were on
TV. Okay,
>> the traffic became overwhelming on the
asset. So everything now is virtual. So
when we have an auction, it's all done
online. But the and it's not a revenue
source for the business. The the real
way. So we put our properties through a
five-step value creation process. And
one of those steps is diversifying the
revenue stream. And it's a great
question because there's substantial
amount of value picked up in self
storage through these ancillary revenue
streams. One of them is a tenant
protection program where uh the tenants
are able to push the liability of a
storm or something happening to their
goods onto the landlord for paying a
certain price. There's obviously there's
prime access. If you need access past
the operating hours, so let's say you
need access 24 hours a day, you're a
small business, you can pay for that. So
these items obviously add up when you
have two to 300,000 units like we
currently operate.
>> I hadn't even thought about the idea of
a storm. So, you live near a coast,
there's a big hurricane coming. Hey, I
have a bunch of furniture. I don't want
to get soaked if we're if we're swamped.
Let's move it inland to a storage area.
And and that's% and and god forbid
something happens to their home. You
know, obviously a lot of stuff gets
moved into the storage facility.
>> So, you you guys are the largest
privately held self- storage um set of
ownership. What's the competition like?
I know I know Blackstone is in here. We
see cubes everywhere. We see public
storage. Who are your big competitors?
And and is there an eventual play where
someone takes you out?
>> Correct. So, there's the group of public
companies that you were just mentioning.
You have extra space, you have public
storage, you have Cub Smart, U-Haul, um
>> U-Haul. I didn't even think of U-Haul.
That's
>> correct. You know, most people think of
them just as the moving business, but
obviously they own a substantial amount
of self storage. Substantial amount. Uh
so what we do differently is we operate
differently. We have a different I would
say rationale when it comes to operating
compared to the REITs where the REITs
are highly focused on occupancy. They
want to keep their occupancy above 90
92%.
>> Where I'll trade occupancy for topline
revenue. So what we'll do is in the off
season when it's slower, we'll hold our
rents, create some occupancy, and then
come spring when the season's busier, we
have room to put the higher payers in.
Where the REITs are more focused on
keeping that occupancy steady at 92,
then come spring, they have no room to
put those people in. So we really focus
on driving the value. We've looked at
what works over the last 20 years, and
now we've just implemented it on scale
across the portfolio. And then the
related issue I see are the mobile pods
people sometimes use is seems sort of
adjacent to the space. What what are
your thoughts on that?
>> So we're not in that business. Um it's a
lot more labor intensive.
>> You got to physically drop the pod off
and then come collect it later.
>> Correct. So in storage, one of the main
benefits is there's we take no availment
risk. So we're never taking possession
of the person's goods. Where the pod you
start to cross that line a bit. So on
the storage, it's 100% the consumers or
the client's possessions. We have no
contact with it. They put their lock on
it. They're the only one that has access
to it. Were 100% hands off.
>> H So this really went from kind of a
niche to a mainstream investment class
over the past couple of years. You were
really early in this space. What did you
see that others miss? And what do you
think a lot of commercial real estate
investors don't quite understand about
this space?
>> It was the fragmentation. Again, the
first fragment assets I was focused on
were the mobile home parks and RV parks,
which I saw starting to consolidate. And
then obviously how well storage did
during those tougher times, which really
led me to storage being highly
fragmented. When I first entered the
asset class, uh even back in around
2015, 2014, it was roughly 80% still
owned by mom and pops. Wow. So just the
the REITs and the institutionals only
own 20% of the the outstanding it's
probably closer to 70 75%. So there's
been a lot of consolidation. But what's
interesting about storage is that the
new supply coming online is being
brought online by mer what we call
merchant builders. So there are regional
developers who have an extra piece of
land. They're shopping center developers
who put a storage up on that corner lot
or that key lot they might have. It's
not the large institutions building the
supply. So it keeps it pretty
fragmented. So they're the ones adding
the new supply to the market.
>> Huh.
>> That that's really that's really kind of
interesting. So a couple of years ago
you did a a raise a couple of billion
dollars from outside investors. Seems
like that's a good chunk of money to go
out and start either buying or building.
How how do you look at the two options?
>> So we we don't like taking construction
risk. So I I like that we buy cash flow.
So day one for an asset to make it
through our IC committee we have a very
high threshold and that part of that
threshold is cash flow. Uh we pride
ourselves on being able to distribute
free cash flow to our investors pretty
early in the fund's life even during the
investment period which is pretty rare.
Uh but what the fund business started in
actually 2015 as a smaller fund. Uh up
until that point I had only purchased on
my own capital and we did a test fund
that did very well. It was a smaller
fund. fund was only 154 million and then
the second fund we grew it to 725
million and then the third fund is the
one you're referring to is roughly $2.5
billion fund.
>> So why go to outside investors rather
than go the securitized route? Is it
that much less expensive to do?
>> It was basically it's a it's scale play.
So we I knew the asset class was going
to consolidate quickly once the other
the large institutions understood it
better or when the large investors did
and I wanted to have that foothold in
the market and the best way to do it was
through the co-mingled fund way where
and also by doing that I think we were
able to disrupt things a bit because we
pride ourselves on delivering what we
call entrepreneurial type returns. We
are operators. We are in the field on a
daily basis. We're in the office
grinding this out. So, we try to deliver
direct property level returns to our
investors.
>> So, so not hands-off REIT like
>> correct
>> uh numbers. So, so let's you mentioned
your investment committee. Walk us
through the typical acquisition. How do
you source these things? Is it still
just calling people up and saying, "Hey,
let us know when you want to sell." and
following up and then what's the process
like through the investment committee.
>> So this this is where it takes the
correct personality to be this part of
the team and these are what we call our
deal team members. So what we use is our
pri proprietary software we have
developed inhouse that we load our
entire buy box into this software and it
projects it's an AI system every self
storage that fits that criteria in the
country and it has every data point
about that asset the owner how big it is
the taxes the rate everything you could
imagine then we allocate that deal to
the deal team member that covers that
area then he or she continues to call
that owner every 30 to 45 days until we
convert them to a seller So some of
these deals that we're buying today,
we've been working on for a decade and
we finally got the seller to the point
to sell. So it's a very thick skinned
long, you know, relationship, but it's a
numbers game. So if we have 36 people
with good information calling these
owners, and the reason why we do so much
upfront information is we want to know
more about this the asset than the
seller does in a way because we want to
separate ourselves from anybody else
calling them. We want to show that we're
sincerely interested in buying their
asset when we're able to tell them, you
know, or even educate them about their
own asset at times.
>> So, I get calls from and emails from
private equity guys. Hey, do you guys
want to sell? Blah blah blah. It's like
it gets annoying at a point. What's the
conversation like with a seller? Hey,
spoke to you back in uh October. Just
checking in, seeing if anything changes.
How receptive are people to this? So,
it's more than and I get those same
emails and it drives me nuts. Or the
phone call, will you sell your property?
I'm like, which property? What area? So,
when we call, you know, we're referring
to an exact asset. We've already been by
the asset. We know what the numbers are.
We know the size of it. We've done in we
might have spent already two weeks
researching that asset before we called
the owner. And instead of somebody just
blindly calling you, Barry, but if they
called you and they knew a lot about,
you know, your your business and they
knew the numbers or estimated, sometimes
you're more intrigued to say, "Hey, this
guy spent the time to learn a lot,
>> but then we visit them on the holidays.
We find out when their their birthday
is." We send them a card, but it's a
constantly being in contact with them.
And then we try to solve that problem,
what they do with the money afterwards.
How do they maximize their sale
proceeds? and we hold their hand through
the process and they become one of our
biggest referrals uh sellers.
>> Huh, that's amazing. Maximizing returns
afterwards. I'm going to assume that's
some combination of it's it's obviously
capital gains. There's a bunch of
depreciation that comes along there.
There's a lot of different things um a
seller can do. I would not have thought
that a buyer is going to facilitate that
process
>> would hold their hand through it because
we want to eliminate any kind of
friction. We need to buy assets. We need
to buy that asset. Like you said, we're
not blindly taking a shotgun and just
waiting for something to come to market.
We're specifically targeting assets that
fit our criteria. So, we know which ones
make sense until we dive into the actual
re, you know, initially it's all
hypothetical until we get the actual
numbers from that seller. Uh that's the
only time things would change.
>> So this sounds like it's a really unique
approach in the commercial real estate.
It is.
>> Uh are you concerned that someone's
going to say, "Hey, these guys seems to
have figured it out. Let let's do what
they're doing."
>> Well, we have 25 year head start on
them. So we have, you know, decades of
information gathering, decades of
conversations with these sellers.
Moreover, it's a heavy lift. It's a
burdensome. It's a expensive what I
carry on my deal teams. But the reason
we do it is because the there's no other
way to buy assets the way we do and
create the value we do if we were buying
them on the open market. You think about
it. If we weren't buying it this way, we
would be buying it like 99% of every
other asset where it gets brokered and
beautiful pictures are taken. It's
presented in its best color. It's
shotguned around to a 100 buyers. You go
through multiple layers of bidding and
at the end you overpaid for the asset.
>> The the winner's curse in a in an
auction situation. Exactly. The more
buyers there are, the more likely it is
the win or overpaid.
>> 100%. So, we bypass all that and we go
directly to the seller and we solve
problems for them.
>> That That's really fascinating. I would
not have guessed that degree of
complexity, sophistication,
and facilitation to the seller.
>> Here's the crazy thing. We're closing
six to seven deals a month.
>> So, one or two a week
>> on average when you look at it that way.
you know, we we'll bundle them up so
they all close in a certain maybe couple
quarters, but yeah, when you average it
out.
>> So, it sounds like just the prep before
you make an offer.
>> If it's a few weeks, it sounds like
you're spending tens of thousands, maybe
hundreds of thousands of dollars.
>> Oh, easily.
>> Really?
>> But you think about it. If I don't get
that asset today, I might get it in a
month. If I don't get it in a month, I
might get it next year. If I don't get
it next year, we're into this for the
long run. you know, we're building a I
think become the best operator of
alternative assets.
>> And and when you guys raised fund three,
that was the largest dedicated self-
storage fund raise at the time. I think
that was $2.5 billion or something like
that.
>> Um, is that still the largest? Have
there been other subsequent raises in in
the self- storage space?
>> That's the largest I know of. That might
have been one of the largest property
specific funds raised as well. I'm not
I've heard that before. And and what's
the total um self- storage headcount?
That's over 300 now.
>> Uh we have over 300 close to 350 assets.
We have around seven or 800 employees
around the country. Uh we have two main
actually three main offices now. We have
one in Saratoga Springs where we're it's
our main headquarters. Then we have one
in Jupiter, Florida. And we're just
opened an office here in West Chelsea.
Hm. I want to talk a little bit about
the state of commercial real estate
today, but I still have a handful of of
questions I have to ask you um uh about
self storage. You mentioned uh small
businesses are are a big customer. I
wouldn't have guessed that. What
percentage of your units are rented by
small businesses and and what do they
use this for?
>> It's a great question. It's probably one
of the most overlooked aspects of self-
storage. Self- storage has two demand
drivers which is very unique in real
estate in general. You think about
residential, you have residential
demand. An office has business demand.
Self- storage, we have both residential
and business demand. A lot of people
think of self- storage, they think of
storing their grandmother's couch. It's
far from it. That might be one or 2%.
The rest is 30 to 40% are small
businesses, contractors, landscapers, a
lot of pharmaceutical reps. So, we are
their warehouse. We're the warehouse for
that small business that employs the
majority of the US population. And
what's nice about storage being on a
month-to-month basis the terms of the
contract. They can expand or contract as
needed with their business. They don't
have to sign a long-term lease with an
industrial or warehouse. It's a perfect
fit for an entrepreneur or a starting
business or even a mature business.
>> Huh. Really, really interesting. And we
were talking previously about uh self-
storage isn't covered by the traditional
landlord tenant law. This is a much
easier set of rules to operate under.
This is a a lean law system. Is that
true in all states? Most states
>> 100%. And actually it carries to Canada
as well uh in parts of Europe that we're
looking at. But yeah, it it and it's
basically very similar to like a bank
loaning money their collateral or the
lean against a particular asset. And
that's the way they look at it. And
remember, we take, like I was saying
before, no availment risk. So we have no
idea what's being stored, what the value
is. So that is the collateral to their
lease if they don't pay. That there's an
auction process. Obviously, we don't
want to auction off anybody's goods. And
if let's say we send out 50 auction
notices, maybe one or two go because
hopefully we can work with that tenant
and get them caught up. But it provides
a way to collect the rent that's owed
unlike a multifamily where it might take
you a year if you're lucky to evict
somebody that's not paying. Self storage
is a lot quicker, easier process.
>> And you mentioned Europe. Uh I don't
think you have a whole lot of exposure
currently in Europe. How big a push are
you looking to make on the continent?
>> So we've been doing a lot of digging in
figuring out what the different aspects
in different cities. You know, it's
interesting because some of the owners
in Europe, let's say, let's look at
London, there will be two or three
owners that own the majority of that
inventory. Our play again is going out
and buying from that oneoff owner. I
really haven't dove into that much, but
it's an important aspect to our business
is we identify the institutional asset
that's still owned by mom and pop. So,
we target that person that owns one or
two facilities. And the reason for that
is that they're not a professional
operator. And the chances are that we'll
be able to achieve our returns if not
better than what we estimated based on
putting our systems and processes over
that family operated asset. So in Europe
they've been consolidated into groups.
So it really doesn't provide us that
ability to buy assets that we think are
highly undermanaged. So we're very
riskadverse. So we'd like to see exactly
how the value is going to be created.
you know, we have a very, you know, game
plan on every asset. What levers need to
be pulled in order to create that value?
And one of those is a lot of the
optimization of the rent role,
optimization of the actual unit mix, the
layout of the facility. And if it's a
larger, more professional owner, the
chances are those lowhanging fruit might
not be there. So we're still trying to
find the markets that have that
fragmentation where there's still
oneoffs and two off owners because that
is really our our bread and butter going
in and acquiring it in that manner.
>> So in the US the laws vary somewhat from
state to state but it's fairly uniform.
Um how different is it country to
country in in the EU or UK?
>> Yeah, but even in the states the when it
comes to the actual implementation of
the lean law it does there's different
timings, there's different fees that can
be charged. There's different things
that you do with the proceeds from the
auction. Let's say you receive more than
what the person owed you. Uh some of it
gets donated away. Some of it gets
contributed back to that seller.
Depending on the state, that extra free
proceeds determines on where it goes. So
we have a whole legal compliance team
that works on this on a daily basis to
make sure that each state law is being
followed every, you know, municipality
in the US, every county or every
territory in Canada. And that's the
research we're doing right now in Europe
and in Australia trying to find the
markets where we know we can go in and
consolidate get economies of scale out
of it but buy the assets the way we want
to buy them on this oneoff way.
>> H really interesting. So here we are
it's uh towards the end of 2025
commercial real estates have seeing
higher uh uh rates of of costs. interest
rates and inflation have been kind of
stubborn and sticky. Uh kind what sort
of refinancing stresses does that create
or are you sidest stepping that whole
interest rate chase these days?
>> So we're very fortunate being in real
estate for as long as we have. We have
developed really deep relationships with
the large institutional lenders uh from
City Bank, the Goldman, the JP, the
to uh Northern Trust. You know, I'm sure
I'm missing one. I'll probably get a
call after this, but we have very deep
rooted relationships and we're
relationship oriented. So, we're there.
We work with these banks. Uh, and there
it's a flight to quality during this
time where lenders are going to the
lenders. They have long-term
relationship and track records with, but
we spend a lot of time making sure that
we're hedging our interest rates. We're
making sure that we're, you know, we're
putting the right debt on the assets at
the right time. Uh, you know, making
sure we're not crossc collateralizing
too much. So, a lot goes into it.
>> I I I can totally imagine. Um, we've
certainly seen shifts in in demographics
with everything from migration and
remote work and aging populations. How
does that affect uh demand for
commercial real estate, both self
storage and other related real estate
>> for it's a big demand driver for self-
storage. So, when you think about it,
people now are living in apartments
more. I think I just heard the average
the first-time home buyers now until
like they're 40 now or some it's crazy
when it used to be like 28 or 26. So
obviously they live in smaller
apartments, they need place to put their
stuff. They need storage. Storage is
almost like a tradeoff. Is it that extra
bedroom that might cost you $500 a month
or is it a storage for $75 a month? You
know, so it's always a trade. Same thing
with an office. Is it that bigger office
where you can have stuff on site or do
you supplement it with a less expensive
at the self storage? So, this goes back
to self storage being a need-based real
estate. And this is why during tougher
times, the aspirational real estate are
the ones that take the hit like we've
seen in office lately.
>> Yeah. Speaking of office, we've seen a
lot of underutilized
um office properties, work from home
continues, hybrid working continues. How
is that affecting what you're doing? I I
just saw related to this. I just saw a
piece in the Wall Street Journal uh this
week that there has been a sudden surge
of office to residential conversions in
lower Manhattan, which two years ago
everybody said, "Oh, it's too expensive.
It's too time consuming." Uh do you
track that sort of stuff? What sort of
impact does that have?
>> We're actually working on one of those
now, actually. Oh, really?
>> It is. It's pretty interesting. So, we
>> So, commercial office to residential
real estate. So what it was was we there
was a uh a group of assets in West
Chelsea uh that we ended up buying that
one of them by actually two of them by
right could be self- storage. We're
converting one to a high-end storage of
the future we're calling it and I can go
into that more modern a lot of
technologydriven self storage. And the
other part of the project was a
ninestory building that's on the
highline that we are going in to have it
converted from office to residential. on
the Highline. All those properties have
become incredibly
>> valuable with some uh
>> uh starchitect designers and that sort
of stuff. It's always it's always
fascinating. I'm sure that's going to be
uh interesting. When you say high tech
self storage,
>> I can imagine
uh an app and an ability to have stuff
brought out to you or stuff brought into
you. What What does high-tech self
storage look like? So, we have actually
harnessed the free energy of your cell
phone to unlock the lock.
>> So, it's pretty interesting. So, it's
almost like a PayPal uh I believe or
Apple Pay uses. So, basically, if you
look at the lock is what controls this
business, the actual lock that's put on
and you have a physical key. You can
lose that key. You can't, you know, it's
hard to share like let's say you're a
small business. How do you give your
employee access without giving multiple
keys? We've devised and have built a
lock that your cell phone gets an
electronic key sent to it and then you
can use that to open up the lock.
There's no batteries needed. There's no
Wi-Fi needed.
>> Some of the new EVs are the same way
where you show up with a phone and it
not only unlocks the car, it lets you
start it.
>> So, we're bringing this to the self-
storage business and we have our first
5,000 being deployed as we speak right
now. But what's really nice, it's
catering not only to the residential,
but the the business consumer then can
share their key for onetime use or time
use with an employee. The other thing is
if they're late and don't pay, their
electronic keys turned off, but the also
the customer gets a full audit at the
end of the month, when their unit's been
open, what time it was, so they know
who's been in and out of their tracks it
>> 100%.
>> Huh. That that's really fascinating. Um,
if it's not Wi-Fi, how does the key
operate? Is that Bluetooth or something?
>> It's purely off. So your cell phone
gives off energy just sitting there and
it was enough to harness to actually
flip that selenoid. It's pretty amazing.
So we've been working for a couple years
to get this perfected.
>> I'm assuming there has to be a battery
in
>> battery your phone.
>> No battery.
>> No battery. That's the key to this. So
and it's good that you brought that up
because everybody else has done it with
a battery in the lock
>> and eventually that battery dies.
>> Even the digital%
digital safes have a battery. The first
time the battery dies on your safe,
you're like, "Oh my god." And you call
them up and say, "Just just replace the
battery.
>> This wasn't supposed to happen."
>> Now it is. So you think about it. One of
our facilities in the story is 3,300
units. Okay? That's a it's 156,000
square feet. So first of the month
comes, if people haven't paid, that
manager has to leave the front desk, go
around and double lock those units.
>> Right?
>> Now the electronic key just magically
freezes the unit. So it reduces our
labor. It gives the consumer a better
product, an easier product to use. Have
to worry about losing a key. They have a
lock for free on their unit. They get an
audit of their unit. It gives them
everything they want to know. It's a
great win-win.
>> Huh. Quite quite fascinating. So, so
given your perspective uh and experience
in all sorts of commercial real estate,
2026, there's a lot of questions. people
have no idea what's going on in terms of
rates, in terms of um government
policies and tariffs and all these
different things. What are you seeing in
the commercial real estate space circa
2026?
>> It's a good question. I was on the phone
on the way down here with some of my
bankers talking about this. You know,
where is the curve look like in the
short term? Uh, you know, obviously I
think sofur is going to be coming down.
You know, obviously rates are being
lowered. I'm hoping to see that on the
five-year Treasury as well. Um, you
know, I
>> is that your benchmark for for fees as
opposed to, you know, 10 year for
mortgages?
>> Yeah. So, I look at the five-year quite
a bit. You know, we'll do 10 year and
some, but the the length of the fund may
really the fiveyear is probably the most
conducive in in a fund structure. It
gives you the flexibility. You know, you
can refinance out of it, but you're not
locked into a point where at times the
debt could be a penalty. If it's under
leverage, you eliminate a lot of buyers
at the end when you do a roll up or if
it's too costly, then you have
defeasants and everything else that goes
along with it. Um, yield maintenance.
But the 5-year works well. So, uh, we've
been hearing from various manufacturers.
There's no sort of clarity as to policy.
Everybody is kind of frozen capex in
place and are a little reluctant to
build or acquire. I get the sense that's
not really an issue with your business.
>> Going back, it's needbased real estate.
People need it to no matter what the
life cycle is, whatever the macroeconomy
is, they need space for their products,
goods, inventory, their personal items.
>> Huh. Really, really fascinating. Last
question before we get to our favorites.
So, so what do you think commercial real
estate investors aren't thinking about
or talking about, um, but perhaps should
be? what what's really overlooked in
terms of pick a subject assets
geographies policy that that's getting
overlooked but but really deserves more
focus I really think it's about how to
really create value in real estate real
estate is not a shortterm investment and
a lot of people look and I'm not even
talking three to five years is short in
real estate I remember years ago this
old-timer told me that you know real
estate's boring for the first 30 years
but it's true it really takes a while
not only to not be boring but to be
actually you know profitable lucrative
then then you start really then it
starts to multiply on itself as the
rents go up and you stabilize those
expenses things start to grow rapidly
but I think it's the longer term vision
to really create true value in real
estate I think the time horizon needs to
be a little bit bigger than three to
five years because what happens then
people are put in the situation where
they have to sell or they have to do
something where instead real estate has
to live through those cy cycles and it's
just the best way to manage them and
just buying the right assets, defensive
assets. Like when we're buying an asset,
one of the biggest thing is traffic
count. But it's not just traffic count,
it's traffic pattern. We want to make
sure like on our storage assets, you're
driving past that facility every day on
the way to work, on the way to school.
It's location, location, location
driven. People have to remember the
basics at times. And sometimes we get
away from that and we start to look for
things that are too sexy or or you know
stay simple, you know, things that
people constantly need. And you'll
realize when you buy assets like that,
there's inflation hedges built in like
storage. I can adjust rents on a 30-day
notice. You know, there's a lot of
inflation hedge built into those type of
assets.
>> It's it's funny the line real estate is
boring for the first 30 years. After Sam
Zel passed away, I read a biography of
him. And one of the things that kind of
that stunned me was he owned some of his
properties for half a century, 50 years,
forever.
>> That's just that's just a unbelievable
number.
>> It's almost like the Warren Buffett way
of buying real estate. And that's the
way I and I think that was probably the
hardest thing for me to get my head
around doing the funds because I know
what real estate can do over when you
get past that 10-year period, that's
when your values start to really start
escalating and really really growing.
And it's really having the right LPS,
understanding uh you know, the asset
classes.
>> Long-term is really long term when it
comes to real estate.
>> I I'm God willing, I'll be here when I'm
94. So, so let's jump to our favorite
questions that we ask all of our guests.
Starting with who who were your mentors
who helped shape this obsession with
real estate from the earliest days and
helped shape your career?
>> Well, shaped the real So, I've had I've
been very fortunate to have some great
partners along the way. Um, from some of
my like Ken Langon, founder of Home
Depot, is a really close friend and
mentor and but along the way I've been I
I think every you learn from everybody
you meet along the way. I I think you
kind and when you look at that anybody
can be a mentor at any given point in
time but I've been fortunate to have
some of the largest investors in the
world like the late Ira Harris who was
absolutely amazing and taught me a lot
you know just life lessons speaking to
them knowing you know the the long-term
look at assets how to be patient what to
look for u you know there's a lot that
have added up over the years and
hopefully now I'm passing that along to
others
>> so let's talk about books what what are
you reading and what are some of your
favorites?
>> I think probably my favorite was
Remnants of a Stock Operator. It was a
great book. Um, currently I'm not
reading anything as of right now. But,
>> uh, what about streaming? What are you
listening to or watching? Anything
keeping you entertained these days?
>> Podcast wise, besides yourself, we were
all in listening to some of that on the
way down. I was just listening to
actually your interview with Unlang
Sloan's uh, CEO,
>> Wilhelm Schmidt of A. Yeah, fascinating
guy. really really that was a great
interview by the way
>> I didn't realize how big into cars he
was
>> c can I tell you there are worse places
to be than a beautiful sunny weekend in
Newport you sounded very happy
>> I had I had a good time that weekend um
so final two questions what sort of
advice would you give to a recent
college grad uh interested in the career
in commercial real estate investing
>> I think it's in anything don't count
somebody else's money I see a lot of
younger people wondering what the other
person next to them is making and
concerned about that. Always do more
than what you're paid for
>> and you have to be enthusiastic.
Enthusiasm is probably the biggest
driver of success I can think of.
>> Our final question, what do you know
about the world of commercial real
estate investing? Today would have been
helpful back in the 1990s when you were
first starting out.
>> I would say it was more about managing
people. I it took me a long time to
learn how to manage people. You know, I
I didn't have the benefit of working for
a company. I started my own business in
college. obviously grew it straight
through. Never had that experience. It
took me a long time to learn how to
manage different I would say um
strengths of different people and I wish
I and the ability to empower people. It
took you know obviously it took me uh
probably a decade and a half before I
really felt comfortable doing that.
>> Uh but yeah I think that was probably if
I had done that earlier I'd probably be
bigger.
>> Really really quite fascinating. We have
been speaking to Bob Moser. He is the
founder and CEO of Prime Group Holdings,
America's largest privately held self-
storage uh investment fund. If you enjoy
this conversation, well, be sure and
check out any of the 592
that we've done over the past 12 years.
You can find those at iTunes, Spotify,
Bloomberg, YouTube, or wherever you get
your favorite podcasts. I would be
remiss if I did not thank the crack team
that helps me put these conversations
together each and every week. Alexis
Noriega is my video producer. Sean Russo
is my head of research. Anna Luke is my
podcast producer. I'm Barry Rholz.
You've been listening to Masters in
Business on Bloomberg Radio.